The Luxembourg Negative Emissions Tariff 
Proposed legislation to stimulate investment in negative emissions technologies and projects.
Author: Sven Clement

I. Explanatory memorandum
II. Text of the bill
III. Commentary on articles
IV. Financial sheet
 
I. Explanatory memorandum

By 2022, a broad scientific consensus has emerged that eliminating all future greenhouse gas emissions, even on an accelerated timeline, is no longer 
realistically sufficient to prevent the planet's average temperature from rising above 1.5 C during this century. Along with rapidly decarbonizing the 
global economy and adapting to inevitable climate change, the global community of nations must also remove excess CO2 and other GHGs from the atmosphere 
through a range of carbon dioxide removal (CDR) pathways, or negative emissions technologies (NETs). By 2050, global negative emissions capacity must 
reach billions of tons per year, and meeting this capacity target requires immediate investment and policy action this decade. According to the 2018 UN 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report on global warming:
“All pathways [that] limit warming to 1.5C use Carbon Dioxide Removal…. Unless affordable and environmentally and socially acceptable CDR becomes feasible 
and available at scale well before 2050, pathways to 1.5C will become difficult to realize.”

Therefore, the main negative emissions policy priorities at present should be: 

1.) Increased investment in and deployment of high-quality, verifiable NETs; and 
2.) the reduction of NET capital and operating costs through accelerated scale-up and learning. 

Luxembourg is well positioned to play a global leadership role in supporting these near-term goals by putting in place a market-based incentive structure 
that will generate and sustain early demand for negative emissions projects, accelerating investment and project completion. 
To this end, this legislation aims to implement a negative emissions tariff, a programme modeled in part after the renewable energy feed-in tariff program 
already in place in Luxembourg, and several  EU member states. Historically, renewable energy feed-in tariffs have played a critically impactful role in 
dramatically increasing the supply of solar and wind energy resources, spurring innovation and production capacity, and lowering technology costs. The 
Luxembourg Negative Emissions Tariff (L-NET) adapts and applies common policy elements from the renewable energy feed-in tariff to the negative emissions 
context. 

II. Text of the bill

Art. 1st – Object.

This bill establishes a framework for the promotion and development of negative emissions technology projects that remove carbon dioxide from the 
atmosphere, and are located both within and outside of the territory of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.

Art. 2. – Definitions.

For the purposes of this law, the following terms mean:

“Carbon dioxide” (CO2): A naturally occurring greenhouse gas that is a by-product of burning fossil fuels and/or biomass, land-use changes, and industrial 
processes; 

“negative emission technologies”: technologies allowing for CO2 to be verifiably removed from the atmosphere and stored in durable materials; 
 “applicant”: the natural or legal person(s) other than the State who submit and sign an application for the  service agreement referred to in this law;
 
 “tonne of carbon dioxide” means one metric tonne of carbon dioxide (CO2);

“durable materials” any naturally occurring or manufactured material in which carbon dioxide can be reliably and durably stored for at least 1000 years;

“negative emissions': amount of  CO2 that is removed from the atmosphere by negative emissions technologies; 

““durable CO2 storage” the secure and verifiable storage of carbon dioxide in materials and geological formations for periods no shorter in length than 
1000 years;

“carbon utilization”: the use of carbon dioxide as an input or component in the production of products or completion of services;

“verified carbon dioxide removal”; forms of carbon dioxide removal that can be directly volumetrically metered and reported on a metric tonne basis 
synchronously with the removal activity using a methodology or methodologies that have been approved by the Minister.”

“verified carbon dioxide storage”; forms of carbon dioxide storage that can be directly volumetrically metered and reported on a metric tonne unit basis 
synchronously with the storage activity using a methodology or methodologies that have been approved by the minister.”

“Negative emissions tariff”: the level of payment that a NET service provider shall receive for delivering verified NET related services.

“Negative emissions tariff programme year”: a period commencing on January 1 and concluding on December 31 of each year during which i. NET service 
applications may be submitted and approved for NET payments, and ii. Specific tariff compensation levels have been established by the Minister and not 
subject to change for the duration of that programme year.

“Minister”: Minister, or Ministers, having the Environment in his/her attributions, hereinafter “the Minister”.

Art. 3. – Modality of project eligibility.

(1) The Minister may grant financial compensation for negative emissions services based on metric tonnes of CO2 removed from the atmosphere and durably stored.

(2) Any project having as its goal the removal of atmospheric carbon dioxide within the territory of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg and which may involve 
the grouping,common ownership and management of negative emissions technologies assets which collectively carry out an negative emissions service are 
eligible for financial compensation, or payments, under the terms referred to in this law.

(3) Projects aimed at eliminating atmospheric carbon dioxide that are located outside of the territory of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg are eligible for 
financial compensation, or payments, under the terms referred to in this law, if minimum fifty percent of ownership of the project assets are held by 
individuals or entities legally domiciled in the territory of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. 

(4)  The minimum carbon dioxide removal threshold per beneficiary is set to 100 tons of CO2 per year.

(5) The maximum carbon dioxide removal threshold per beneficiary is of 10,000 tonnes of CO2 per year.

Art. 4. – Negative emissions tariff value categories

(1) Financial compensation shall be transacted on a volumetric, performance basis with payment awarded for verified metric tonnes of CO2 (€ per metric tonne of CO2) removed and durably stored during the term of the contract.The negative emissions tariff shall comprise two  separate value categories that 
service providers shall be eligible to receive payments for:

- Verified carbon dioxide removal value category: the verified removal of CO2 from the atmosphere; and the utilization of such gasses in the production 
and/or completion of goods and/or services. At a minimum it shall be compulsory for participating NET service projects to fulfill the carbon dioxide 
removal value category as a condition of payment eligibility for payment under this programme.

- Verified carbon dioxide storage value category: the verified storage of CO2 that has been removed from the atmosphere in materials, geological formations, or ocean-based reservoirs for a minimum period of 1000 years. 

(2) The Minister shall have authority to adjust tariff levels corresponding to the above value categories on an annual basis in advance of the 
commencement of each programme year. Value categories are non-mutually exclusive.

(3) At the commencement of the first programme year of the negative emissions tariff programme the following minimum tariffs shall be applied to each value category. 

Verified carbon dioxide removal value category - € 150 / metric tonne of CO2.
Verified carbon dioxide storage value category - € 400 / metric tonne of CO2.

(6) Each year the Minister shall present to the parliament an assessment report indicating the need  to adjust value category compensation rates for the subsequent year based on analysis of real market and technology trends and developments. 
Adjusted tariffs will be made publicly known and placed in effect on December 30 of each year prior to the subsequent programme year commencement on January 1. 

Art. 5. - Certification of negative emissions technologies and storage sinks; monitoring, reporting and verification of carbon dioxide removal and storage services.
 
The Minister shall be directed to approve and implement standards and rules related to the certification, monitoring, reporting and verification of negative emissions technologies that will be eligible to participate in and receive compensation for services under the negative emissions tariff programme. 
 
Negative emissions technology evaluation and approval shall include:
- An analysis of all positive emissions up- and down-stream that occur throughout the life cycle of the technology’s manufacture and operation. 
- A quantification and cost-benefit analysis of economic, social and environmental externalities that may result from the implementation and operation of 
the technology.
 
CO2  storage sink evaluation and approval shall include:
- An analysis to determine that storage sinks meet a minimum 1,000 year threshold period, and to assess risks associated with premature reversal and re-
emission of removed CO2.
- A quantification and cost-benefit analysis of the economic, social and environmental externalities that may result from CO2  storage over a minimum 1,000 year period. 

Monitoring, reporting and verification requirements for  CO2  removal and storage shall include include the following information:
- The entity or entities responsible for delivering the removal and storage.
- The gross quantity of CO2 removed from the atmosphere and/or durably stored in an approved CO2 sink. 
- The start and end dates of CO2 removal activities to be compensated for under the program that were completed during the reporting period. 
- The type of sink that the  CO2  has been stored in, including data attesting to the durability of that sink.
- The location or locations of the CO2  removal and/or storage activities. 

The minister shall establish and administer the following programme oversight, evaluation, and enforcement functions:
- A project audit function to assess and determine programme compliance.
- Liability terms assigned for the provision of ‘re-removal’ if leakage occurs.
- A public information management system capable of storing data on carbon removals and storage realized as a result of the negative emissions - -tariffprogramme.
- References  to relevant international CDR stakeholders to support the emerging international CDR legal and governance regime.

Art. 6. – Negative emissions tariff programme funding sources and terms.

The feed-in tariff in the present law is financed by the “Fonds climat et énergie” as created by Loi du 15 décembre 2020 relative au climat et modifiantla loi modifiée du 31 mai 1999 portant institution d’un fonds pour la protection de l’environnement.

Art. 7. - Application procedures

Applications for participation in the negative emissions tariff programme may be requested by the legal representative of the service provider entity or 
entities in the name and on behalf of several natural or legal persons who will be the recipients of payments, and are part of the said entity.

The negative emissions tariff programme application period shall commence on January 1 and conclude on December 31 of each year, or until funding that has 
been allocated for the current programme year has been fully subscribed. 

The Minister shall be directed to implement a web-based platform by which service providers and other interested parties may review full programme information, and complete and submit applications via a digital form.

The aforementioned form is to be completed by the applicant.

service provider applications shall be received, reviewed and approved on a first-come, first-served basis.

In the event of adaptation of the project by the applicant once the application has been approved, the applicant may submit a request with a view to 
obtaining a new agreement in principle.

As part of the review of the application materials investigation of the files, the Minister  reserves the right to request the production of any document 
it deems necessary to be able to ascertain compliance with the conditions imposed by this regulation.

Art. 8. Service contract terms and disbursal of service payments 

service providers shall be compensated for services rendered at the fixed tariff following article 4 (4) for a maximum term of 5-years. Once entered into 
contract, the tariff established for participating service providers shall not be subject to change during the 5-year term.

The service provider may voluntarily discontinue participation at any point during the 5-year term. In this case, they lose their right to financial compensation.

Art. 9. Rules governing the suspension of contracts and payments

(1) In the event of an inaccurate or incomplete declaration with a view to the granting of payments provided for by this law, payments shall be refused 
and, in the case where it has already been granted and liquidated, the restitution of the unduly affected payments is required with retroactive effect. 
The same applies when the beneficiary, at the request of the Minister, does not communicate the declaration, information and documents requested.

(2) In the event of the granting of financial assistance provided for by this law, the files may be subject to re-examination at any time.

Art. 10. Amending Provisions

Article 174 of the law of 17 December 2010 concerning undertakings for collective investment is amended as follows:

Paragraphs 3 and 4 are set out as follows:

 “(3) This rate is 0.06% for organizations whose collective investment is in investments made in high emissions and/or “difficult to abate” sectors 
        designated by the regulator (by Grand-Ducal regulation?), including oil & gas . »

 “(4) This rate is 0.02% for investments (collective investment?) by organizations in carbon dioxide elimination projects defined by the proposed law… (or added EDC to Art.1 Definitions? »

Income Tax Amending Provisions
 
Article 68 of the amended law of 13 February 2007 relating to specialized investment funds
 
The law of 3 June 2021 amending the organization of the electricity market
 
PL 7266 at for feed in tariffs, cooperative, to feed the solar power.
 
Amended law of 23 December 2016 on income tax
 
Law of 23 December 2004 1) establishing a greenhouse gas emission quota trading system; 2) creating a fund to finance the Kyoto mechanisms; 3) amending article 13bis of the amended law of 10 June 1999 relating to classified establishments. - Legilux (public.lu)
 
Grand-ducal regulation of 1 August 2014

III. Commentary on Articles

The purpose of this law, as defined in the explanatory memorandum, consists in authorizing the Government, in the person of the Minister having the
Environment in his attributions, to grant financial assistance to projects aimed at capturing and eliminating carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.

Section 1.
The article defines concepts relating to the removal of carbon dioxide and necessary for law enforcement.

Section 2.
The article defines the minister responsible for granting financial assistance.
In addition, it defines domestic EDC projects performing minimum threshold EDC service, and foreign EDC projects performing minimum threshold EDC service 
which however do not exceed the maximum threshold and fulfill the criteria specified in Article 3 paragraph 1. and 2, as eligible for financial aid.

Section 3.
The article defines the different types of aid that can be granted by the Minister. Thus, it appears

Section 4.
This article defines the amounts of the various financial aids.

Section 6.
 
Section 7.
This article does not call for any particular comments.

Section 8.
This article proposes to make a specific modification to article 174 of the law of December 17, 2010 and (…). It's about incentivizing...

[1] IPCC, 2018: Global warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global 
greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and 
efforts to eradicate poverty [v. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, H. O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. 
Pidcock, S. Connors, J. B. R. Matthews, Y. Chen , X. Zhou, M. I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, T. Waterfield (eds.)]. In Press.
